What is the difference between a CMS and a DAM?
A content management system (CMS) is used to build, display and publish content on your brand's website, whereas a digital asset management (DAM) system is designed to store, manage, manipulate, and monitor all brand assets individually.
  DAM software enhances seven essential aspects of a brand’s operational efficiency with digital assets: creation, organization, collaboration, distribution, storage, and performance measurement.
Let’s take a closer look at how DAM improves each of these areas.

Creation
Teams with DAM can scale projects by leveraging integrations with creative tools like Adobe Creative Suite, native video editors, and project management applications such as Smartsheet, so teams can create new assets without toggling between platforms.

Organization
Brands are producing exponentially more assets than ever before. DAM software acts as a central source of truth for organizing and tracking that digital content.
You can use tags, filters, and advanced search capabilities – such as in-document search and image recognition – to quickly retrieve files from asset libraries of any size.
DAM platforms such as Brandfolder also allow users to add metadata tags to any file type, track version history, assign access levels and permissions, set collection expiration dates, and use AI to detect duplicate asset uploads.
With custom approval settings, you can reduce the risk of redundancies and ensure that assets are never distributed erroneously.

Collaboration
After uploading assets, users can comment, pin annotations, make edits, and in the process, streamline the entire review and approval process.
Collaboration extends to any asset type or media content, from PDF documents to design files and videos. Organizations can access and update files from anywhere, so teams can collaborate with the right people no matter where they’re located.

Distribution
A DAM system enables assets to be published anywhere, from one cloud-based location.
Distribute assets directly from your DAM using public or private links, and for added security, you can set expiration dates for links.
Embed assets directly into your website, so visitors and media outlets can access the most up-to-date logos, bios, and brand imagery. Every time an asset is edited, or a new one added, it’s automatically updated at the point of distribution.

Storage
A DAM gives agencies and brands true digital asset storage for unlimited files, of any size, in one secure, cloud-based location. This is critical when storing larger assets such as high-res imagery, video, and audio files.
File backups, custom user permissions, and rights management features enhance the security of stored assets. While storage is unlimited, users can set asset expiration dates, to reduce unnecessary virtual clutter.
A DAM gives agencies and brands true digital asset storage for unlimited files, of any size, in one secure location. This is critical when storing larger assets such as high-res imagery, video and audio files.
File backups, user permissions and rights management ensure all assets are stored securely.

Performance & Measurment
On-premise and traditional cloud-based storage systems are limited in what they can tell you about asset usage.
A digital asset management solution can provide detailed analytics and insights about asset views, placements, and engagements. You’ll be able to see how activity has trended over time and use that information to more accurately assess the ROI of brand assets.

  TOP DIGITAL ASSET MANAGMENT BUSSINESS Use Cases
Now that you have a general knowledge of what digital asset management is and its benefits, let’s take a look at the business case behind DAM software.

  Use digital asset management software to maintain brand consistency
Did you know that customers are more likely to purchase from a brand they recognize? Because of this, Fortune 500 companies make a proactive effort to maintain brand consistency in their marketing and advertising campaigns.
87% of buyers prefer brands that provide consistent customer experience across all channels. (Source: Zendesk)
Maintaining a brand identity and standards is easier when you have a DAM platform. You can restrict access to legacy files and ensure that only the most up-to-date assets are accessible, so users can create, manage, share, and collaborate on assets and rich media without deviating from your brand guidelines. Once creatives have finished designing an asset, they can streamline production on simple tasks by saving the layout as a template so that approved users can quickly repurpose the design.

  Use digital asset management software to gauge asset ROI and insights
A DAM solution makes it easier to gather, manage, and interpret data from multiple sources, giving you valuable insights on how to maximize the use of your digital assets to support your business goals.
Brandfolder offers insights such as views, downloads, and shares — by user, by asset collection, or by organization.

  Use digital asset management software to keep your content secure
Keeping your assets secure at all times is as important as it can be difficult to manage. Files can be corrupted, servers can crash and fail, and files can become lost due to mismanagement. DAM software eliminates all these risks because it stores and secures all your digital assets in the cloud.
Cloud-based DAM systems come with features like version control, rights management, and data encryption for file transfers and storage. Additional security enhancements include SAML & SSO identity management, and routine application and infrastructure testing to detect any security vulnerabilities that could compromise customer files.

  Use digital asset management to improve campaign collaboration
A digital asset management solution creates an environment built for collaboration. When your creative teams use a file sharing platform that serves as a “central source of truth,” it’s easy for everyone to be on the same page, regardless of their location, time zone, or department.
Digital asset management solutions allow you to define role hierarchies and user permissions across all workflows. You can ensure each user has access only to the files or tasks that are most relevant to them, and you can automate alerts that tell your team and external stakeholders when action is required.

  Use digital asset management software to accelerate asset access
Finding a specific digital asset can be time-consuming and frustrating when files are stored across multiple platforms and folders.
In fact, employees without access to a DAM system spend five times longer looking for the right assets.
DAM software uses AI to attach relevant metadata tags to assets, based on what it “sees” when you import assets. The platform also reads and stores any existing metadata, and users can edit, add, or delete tags to improve asset search results.

  Digital asset management speeds up time-to-market
When scaling your digital presence, time is of the essence. You can’t afford to lose minutes or hours to inefficient processes. Yet, 46% of marketers report wasting time due to downloading and uploading assets using multiple tools, and 51% say they have wasted money on campaign assets that they can’t locate.
As discussed, a DAM platform allows you to store, organize, and retrieve assets quickly. Within the context of any campaign or creative workflow, this helps move steps along while minimizing redundant and costly rework. You can also keep all feedback within the platform to eliminate the delays that typically come with lengthy email-based feedback chains.
The result: faster launch of compliant and on-brand marketing campaigns

  Use digital asset management software to mitigate compliance risks
Keeping track of licensing agreements and expiration dates is a challenge when you have a massive database of photos, audio files, videos, and logos. Non-compliance with such agreements can result in fines and tarnish your brand’s reputation.
Digital asset management systems come with a digital rights management (DRM) feature that ensures all copyright information is up-to-date and that all licensing agreements are upheld. With the ability to set access permissions, licensing expiration dates, and automated licensing expiration alerts, you don’t have to track licensing and permissions outside of your DAM system.

  When should I invest in a DAM?
Any brand or business with a growing digital asset library should consider investing in digital asset management software (DAM), in order to increase efficiency, improve asset performance, strengthen security, and accelerate production timelines.

  What does a digital asset manager do?
A digital asset manager is responsible for the taxonomy, metadata, performance measurement, storage, and secure distribution of an organization's digital assets. Brands often have a digital asset management (DAM) system in place before hiring a digital asset manager.

12 Benefits of a Digital Asset Management System

Digital asset management software will keep internal and external teams organized within a single source of truth. It allows for quick access to relevant files, automated workflows, and the ability to manage permissions for individual pieces or entire asset collections.
The list of benefits that brands find as a result is wide ranging for organizations inside and out, but there are a number of common themes.

-Find digital assets fast with little to no training
-Customize asset organization
-Keep all asset-related collaboration within a single platform
-Prevent duplication of digital content
-Ensure digital assets are never unused
-Access and share files with anyone, anytime, anywhere, and on any device
-Create and collaborate on digital assets in one place
-Easily distribute company content across digital channels - CMS, social media and more
-Maintain brand consistency
-Set expiration dates for licensed assets
-Identify opportunities for repurposing digital assets
-Analyze how assets are performing, where they’re being used, and who is using them

  
